Did the Romans have their own form of
gun control when it came to ancient
weapons?
It's a natural question that arises when
you consider the duality of Rome's love
of the sword when it comes to external
wars and their fear of the sword when it
comes to internal revolts and slave
uprisings.
It turns out that this tension dates
back to the earliest days of Rome's
founding when brother had turned on
brother.
In response, this grave threat of
domestic bloodshed would be prevented by
the establishment of a sacred boundary
known as the Pomerium beyond which no
weapons would be permitted. Even
centuries later, this legal and
religious demarcation was preserved to
protect the inviolable heart of Rome
from the violent pollution of the
outside world.
It's a nice concept in theory, but how
could this system possibly work when the
citizenry was supposed to take up arms
as a militia every spring?
When triumphal generals wish to parade
their troops through the streets?
When policemen were needed to keep the
peace? And when gladiators became the
hottest thing in entertainment?
And what of the use of weapons outside
of the Pomerium?
What of the rest of the empire?
Diving into this topic reveals a
fascinating tapestry of answers from
ceremonial disarming rituals to taboo
practices,
zero tolerance policies,
personal defense exceptions, and even
lists banning the use of specifically
war-grade weapons. It's all the best
parts of the nitty-gritties of history.
So today, let's explore gun control in
ancient Rome.
So as someone who spends long hours
reading, writing, producing these
documentaries, I know just how important
it is to invest in a good night's sleep.
And I've been getting my full recharge
on with the Kana Japanese Joinery Bed
from today's sponsor FlexiSpot. The
first thing that stands out is the
premium but affordable be assembled
and broken down in minutes. And this is
great for people like me who are on the
move, who have to rearrange furniture on
a regular basis. It's just super quick.
What's even better with the design is
that by using traditional methods of
Japanese woodworking, it comes together
in a stable structure without the use of
conventional fasteners that can loosen
up the joints and cause all that
creakiness in old beds.
From my experience, I've absolutely
loved just how quiet the Kana Japanese
joinery bed is because of the recessed
legs that let it fit snugly up against
the wall. It's prevented a lot of nights
where I have to work late and I sneak
into bed and I want to keep quiet for my
partner or my dog. Another reason I love
the bed frame is because of the amount
of dedicated storage that's here. You
have over 10 inches to put what you want
under there. Be it drawers, clothing
bags, you name it. Luggage, pets. My dog
likes going under there. And especially
for me who has a trove of books that's
overflowing on my shelves, I now have a
new nook to hide out all my books.
What's more, there's tons of ways to
customize your ideal bed with
headboards, nightstands, adjustable
backrest, and more on the FlexiSpot
website. For me, the process was super
quick. You'll find that items are ready
to be shipped out in 2 days and will be
delivered in 3 to 5. So, you can get
that bed ASAP.
As you can see in my room, the end
result is a clean, minimalist aesthetic
that holds great value at a better price
than any competitors. So, click the link
below to experience a FlexiSpot bed
frame for yourself and be sure to use
our code for an extra discount.
Transform your sleep with comfort,
convenience, and unmatched value.
Enjoy.
We can begin our exploration of ancient
weapons control with the city of Rome
itself.
Here, the enactment of a ban came in the
form of a literal line in the sand known
as the Pomerium.
Its origin dates back to the mythical
founding of the city.
According to legend, the brothers
Romulus and Remus had quarreled over
which hill should serve as a suitable
site.
In one retelling, Romulus laid claim to
the Palatine by plowing a boundary
around its base.
When Remus breached this line mocking
its inadequacy, his brother struck him
down in anger.
Thus, did Romulus ascend as sole king of
the new settlement.
Reportedly, his first act was to fortify
the Palatine with a set of walls known
as the Murus Romuli.
The process was said to have occurred
with sacrifices to the gods and many
rituals meant to establish the legal and
religious bounds of the new city.
This boundary would come to be known as
the Pomerium. A name and practice which
may have had its roots in proceeding
Etruscan tradition.
Following Romulus's first establishment
of the boundary, it was claimed that the
sixth king, Servius Tullius, would
expand its footprint.
The exact extent of Rome's early
Pomerium is unknown, though ancient
authors give us clues about its rough
plan.
Apparently, this demarcation would last
nearly 500 years until the 1st century
BC, when it would be once more expanded.
By this time, the original walls would
have long since faded and the urban
sprawl far outstripped its bounds.
However, what remained were apparently
marker stones known as cippi, which
preserved the limits of the Pomerium.
But, what was so important about this
boundary?
Well, in legal terms, the Pomerium
established the land that was officially
the city of Rome, beyond which was
merely its territory.
This distinction had all kinds of
ramifications for laws regarding the
wielding of magisterial power, the
status of soldiers, the bearing of arms,
and the burial of the dead.
On a more symbolic level, the Pomerium
marked out the divide between the
impurities of the outer world and the
sacred inviolable heart of Rome.
Breaching this barrier, therefore,
risked harming the city in a deep
metaphysical sense.
Thus, it was that passage across the
Pomerium was constrained to just a few
designated gateways.
According to tradition, it was here that
the plow which first formed the Pomerium
had been lifted to allow for such a
breach.
But, even if one attempted to cross
through one of these gates, there were
further restrictions in place to
preserve its sanctity.
Of particular relevance to our video
today will be the controls the Romans
put in place over weapons, both due to
their practical dangers of violence and
the spiritual pollution associated with
instruments of bloodletting.
Let's take a closer look.
For a Roman citizen, there were
relatively straightforward rules about
owning and using weapons.
If you lived in the city of Rome, as
designated by the Pomerium, you were
forbidden from wielding a weapon of war.
This was a sacred boundary, and weapons
were only allowed under extreme
circumstances.
A violation would be as much a violation
of the gods as it was a violation of the
law.
Certainly, there would have been law
breakers in this case. Indeed, some
people smuggled in daggers, and there
are historical references to armed men
in the streets.
However, for much of Rome's history,
prior to the civil wars, we actually see
a surprising adherence by the public to
this no weapons policy.
For example, when mobs did form, our
sources commonly describe them as
brandishing makeshift weapons, such as
paving stones and table legs, rather
than actual swords or spears.
But we might now wonder,
what about the cases where Rome might
actually want its people to bear arms,
such as for law enforcement or for war?
In the case of law enforcement, the same
bans on weapons applied. Specifically,
this had to do with the lictors, who in
the age of the Republic acted as the
designated enforcers for the elected
magistrates.
These muscle men of the law were
equipped with an axe tied within a
bundle of rods.
The rods were a symbol of punishment,
the axe of execution.
However, when operating within the
Pomerium, the axe head was removed, a
process which was likely accompanied by
many rituals.
Inside the Pomerium, the lictors would
therefore have been left to use their
rods or whips to keep the population in
check.
Only in times of extreme crisis, when a
dictator had been appointed, could his
lictors bear their axes within the
Pomerium.
Once more though, we must assume that
special rites accompanied their transit
across Rome's most sacred boundary line.
Another case to consider would be the
use of weapons for war.
Recall that during the Republic, the
army was a militia force whose citizens
were responsible for bringing their own
war gear.
This posed a huge risk to the pomerium
as each campaign season, soldiers would
have shuttled back and forth between
their homes in the city and the rallying
grounds on the fields of Mars.
But the Romans were never practical
people and their solution was to have
the soldier safely arm and disarm
themselves in an elaborate process known
as the Armilustrium meant to handle this
thorny theological issue.
The historian H.H. Scullard describes
the ceremony as follows.
"The beginning of the campaigning season
in March had been marked by the dancing
of the Salii through the streets, the
Equirria and the Quinquatrus, and the
Tubilustrium. So, its end on the 19th of
October saw the ceremonies of the
October Horse and the Armilustrium when
the army had to be purified from the
dangerous infection that it may have
incurred from contact with bloodshed and
strangers."
This was a festival in honor of Mars.
His Salian priests, probably once again,
danced and sang through the streets.
During the sacrifices, tubae were
sounded and the arma and ancilia were
purified and then put away until the
next year.
This prohibition against soldiers
bearing arms in the city would be a core
part of Rome's civic taboos.
However, there was one major exception,
the triumph.
This was a celebration in which the
Senate allowed a commander to lead their
soldiers in an armed march across the
city, an otherwise unthinkable
blasphemy.
Yet to avert the dangers of such a
sacrilege, they did so under strict
legal and spiritual conditions.
For instance, special permission had to
be granted to the general to be able to
wield their imperium within the pomerium
on the day of the march.
Once inside, he and his men followed a
specific route from the triumphal
gateway to the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus.
The final moment of the triumph would
then involve sacrifices, dedications,
and a relinquishing of the general's
imperium.
A neat, tidy, and well-regulated end to
this deviation from the norms.
Other exceptions to the weapons ban in
Rome came into play when dealing with
gladiators.
By necessity of their trade, they had to
bear lethal arms.
This was a problem, as the majority of
gladiators were slaves. Even the
citizens who chose to take up gladiation
were effectively stripped of their civic
rights.
Initially though, armed gladiators were
only a minor issue, as their use was
confined to smaller-scale funeral games
that were wrapped in a host of other
religiously prescribed customs.
Over time though, gladiator games grew
wildly popular, shedding all vestiges of
their former demure nature.
By 105 BC, the first gladiator schools
were established, and the games became a
powerhouse of the entertainment
industry.
Once more, Rome would be reminded that
with weapons came danger.
Within 30 years, there had been three
major slave uprisings, the most famous
of which would stem from one of these
gladiator schools.
Thus, severe regulations were reimposed.
Lethal weapons were not to be allowed
anywhere near the schools, and the
number of gladiators was capped to 320
pairs for even the largest of games.
Yet over time, as the remembrance of
these dangers faded, and as the demand
for ever more spectacular games
increased, the rules would once more be
increasingly bent.
Sometimes the rules were even
intentionally broken as an exception to
the exception.
On rare occasions, when the need was
especially dire, consuls even attempted
to mobilize gladiators as a militia
force to defend the city, promising them
freedom as payment. Yet from what we can
see, these militias never seemed to be
particularly effective. The men were
entertainers after all more than
soldiers, and they were not trained as
such.
Outside of these special occasions,
gladiators were heavily managed and kept
away from real weapons as much as
possible outside of the arena.
But while gladiators might have had
their exceptions to weapons bans due to
Rome's unquenchable thirst for the
games, there was no such leniency for
slaves outside of this industry.
Not in Rome, not anywhere.
After all, the slave population was
absolutely massive and as multiple
revolts had shown, they posed a distinct
threat to the Republic.
Thus, even if the reason for bearing
arms was a good one under normal
circumstances, a slave was given no
license or pity.
The following account gives a good sense
of this practice. Quote,
"L. Domitius was equally tenacious in
his attitude, for when he was praetor
governing Sicily, a boar of
extraordinary size was presented to him.
He commanded the shepherd who had killed
him to be brought before him and
inquired of him with what weapon he had
killed the beast. When he found the
shepherd had killed him with a hunting
spear, he caused the shepherd to be
crucified.
Some would take this to be the height of
all severity, for it may be disputed on
both sides. But the reason and
necessities of public government will
not suffer the praetor to be reckoned
over vigorous."
Thus, we see that Rome had a deeply held
belief in the regulation of weapons both
for practical and religious reasons.
For the most part, sumptuary laws were
simply deemed to be unnecessary.
People were not likely to break
religious rights and if they did so
without good reason, the punishment
would be swift and brutal.
Yet things would begin to change in the
end of the Republican period as the
norms which had long kept the peace were
torn apart by civil strife.
Admittedly, there had always been
crime-related violence in the city.
Yet things truly began to unravel in the
late 2nd century BC as politicians
weaponized the populace against one
another.
Among the most famous incidents of the
spiraling situation would be the murder
of the populist Gracchi brothers.
In 133 BC, the elder Tiberius had
attempted to force through agrarian
reforms only to be met by a reactionary
establishment that saw the Pontifex
Maximus himself summon a mob to kill
him.
The situation is reported as follows,
quote,
"Tiberius accordingly reported this to
those who stood about him, and they at
once girded up their togas and breaking
in pieces the spear shafts with which
officers keep back the crowd,
distributed the fragments among
themselves that they might defend
themselves against their assailants.
Thereupon, Nasica sprang to his feet and
said, 'Since then the chief magistrate
betrays the state, you who wish to
follow the laws, follow me.'
Now the attendants of the senators
carried clubs and staves which they had
brought from home, but the senators
themselves seized the fragments and legs
of the benches that were shattered by
the crowd in its flight and went up
against Tiberius, at the same time
smiting those who were drawn up to
protect him.
Of these, there was a rout and a
slaughter, and as Tiberius himself
turned to fly, someone laid hold of his
garments, so he let his toga go and fled
in his tunic. But he stumbled and fell
to the ground among some bodies that lay
in front of him. As he strove to rise to
his feet, he received his first blow, as
everyone admits, from Publius Saturius,
who smote him on the head with the leg
of a bench. To the second blow, claim
was made by Lucius Rufus, who claimed it
as some noble deed. And of the rest,
more than 300 were slain by blows from
sticks and stones, but not one by the
sword.
As you can see with that last sentence,
our sources are emphatic in pointing out
that even at this elevated moment of
violence, the prohibition against
weapons was still being upheld.
But this would not last long.
10 years later, when the younger
brother, Gaius Gracchus, made his own
populist moves, there would be another
armed confrontation. This time the
situation proved far more dire, with men
arming themselves on both sides.
The Graccan partisans used trophy
weapons pulled from the displays of
homes, while the consul mustered a
military unit composed heavily of
archers.
Even so, Plutarch is extremely careful
to mention the reluctance by Gracchus
himself to visibly take up arms within
the city.
Quote, when day came, Fulvius was with
difficulty roused from his drunken sleep
by his partisans, who armed themselves
with the spoils of war about his house,
which he had taken after a victory over
the Gauls during his consulship, and
with much threatening threatening and
shouting, went to seize the Aventine
Hill.
Gaius, on the other hand, was unwilling
to arm himself, but went forth in his
toga, as though on his way to the forum,
with only a short dagger on his person.
Indeed, one of the first indications we
see of the steady deterioration of the
Roman situation is when weapons began to
be openly carried within the city of
Rome itself.
In 88 BC, for instance, Sulla broke
long-held tradition by marching his own
legions upon Rome, taking the fight to
the streets themselves, and stationing
men across the city to assert his power.
Soon, such sights proved more common as
the years of open civil war unfurled.
Cicero makes particular note of this in
his invectives against Mark Antony.
Quote, as a memorial, too, for
posterity, must we not stamp with the
record of the deepest ignominy this
order can inflict, the fact that Marcus
Antonius, alone in this city, since the
founding of the city, had openly with
him an armed guard, a thing neither our
kings ever did, nor those that after the
expulsion of the kings sought to seize
kingly power.
I remember Cinna. I have seen Sulla, and
but lately Caesar. For these three
possessed more power since the community
was made free by Lucius Brutus and the
whole state. I cannot affirm they were
surrounded by no weapons. This I assert,
though, those weapons were not many, and
were concealed.
But now, an array of men-at-arms used to
attend this pest, Cassius, Mustela,
Tiro, displaying their arms, led through
the forums like gangs themselves.
Barbarian archers marched in regular
column.
And the most infamous thing of all, not
only to see, but to hear of, is that
armed men, brigands, assassins were
stationed in the shrine of the
conquered. The temple became a prison
when the doors of the conquered were
closed. Conscript fathers gave their
votes while brigands were moving about
amid the benches.
In this era of civil wars, there was
unfortunately little grounds for the
assertion of weapons control outside the
laws of the jungle, where now might made
right.
This tumultuous period would come to a
close when Augustus emerged as the
ultimate victor following the Battle of
Actium in 31 BC.
In the aftermath, there was much work to
be done to bring back a sense of peace
and stability.
Within the city of Rome, this meant a
restoration of the sacred pomerium.
From now on, weapons would no longer be
allowed within the city grounds, except
of course for the emperor's bodyguard.
But even in this case, the Praetorians
had their barracks erected outside the
sacred boundary of Rome.
In the ensuing imperial era, other
government units were deployed to the
city as well.
The vigiles, for instance, acted as
night watchmen and firefighters.
Yet these men were emphatically not
equipped with swords.
For their policing duties, they used
staves, while for their firefighting
duties, they used mattocks, axes, picks,
and even occasionally billhook staves.
Elsewhere across the empire, we see
similar policies in place.
Many cities shared Rome's conclusion
that allowing weapons of war within
their walls was cause for trouble. Thus,
they often had rules or customs in place
to limit their use.
In some cases, the same type of sacred
pomerium boundary existed.
This was especially true for cities
founded by the Romans. For instance,
when a new colony was established, one
of the first steps was to undertake the
ritual of the sulcus primogenius, or
initial plowing of the city limits.
Our sources state that this was to take
place on an auspicious day with a
toga-clad magistrate and priests in
attendance.
These oversaw the plowing itself, which
was supposed to proceed counterclockwise
with a paired team of yolked animals
featuring a cow on the inside and a bull
on the outside.
As in Rome, their tracing of the
boundary line was only interrupted when
they reached a gate location, at which
point the plow would momentarily be
lifted.
Thus, we see that individual cities
would be the ones to take it upon
themselves to regulate the use of
weapons, sometimes, but not always, in
the Roman model.
However, it does seem that as the
imperial era progressed, there was some
desire to pass more sweeping
regulations. One of the best sources we
have on this is actually from the late
imperial period.
Justinian, who ruled from 527 to 565 AD,
made it one of his great goals to
compile and organize Roman law, which
had become overwhelmingly complicated
and contradictory. His Codex thus became
a massive tome that compiled Roman laws
over the past centuries. And while they
don't all have dates, they do give us a
reference as to the laws that were on
the Roman books.
Three of these codes are of particular
interest to us today.
The first code states, quote, "Let the
use of arms without the knowledge of the
emperor be forbidden."
This passage was likely intended to be a
check on banditry and potential
uprisings.
The following passage goes on to
emphasize and expand the idea. Quote,
"No one without our knowledge and
consultation shall be involved in the
movement of any type of arms in any
way."
Based on this passage alone, it doesn't
seem like a prohibition on bearing arms
at all, so much as it was on the
trafficking of these arms.
That being said, in one of the later
amendments to the code, there's a
thoroughly fleshed-out law banning all
weapons manufactured outside of state
armories, as well as calling for the
removal of all weapons from private
persons.
Even armories assigned to military units
were banned from the creation of
weapons, only the maintenance thereof.
This is made explicitly clear
throughout, including this passage,
quote, "In order to make it clear what
arms are prohibited by us to be made by
all private and other persons except
those enrolled in the Imperial Armories,
and which are prohibited to be sold to
private persons. We are also pleased to
indicate them.
We forbid all private persons to make
and sell bows, arrows, broad two-edged
swords, swords carried on the hips,
cuirasses, pikes, lances made in any
form or shape, javelins called
monokontia by the Assyrians, and the
missiles called zibionoi, also shields
and helmets.
We permit no one to make these arms
except those who are enrolled in the
Imperial Armories. We permit only small
knives to be made by and sold to private
persons, which cannot be readily used in
war.
This late Imperial Edict is quite clear,
though it's completely unknown how
actually effective it happened to be.
Its primary target seemed to be both
uprisings from within the population,
especially the serf class, and the
movement of weapons to Rome's borders
and beyond, where barbarian incursions
were a constant problem for the Empire,
especially when fueled by arms from
Rome.
It's at this point that we should make a
final comment on the use of weapons for
self-defense.
While we have shown the many ways in
which Rome and its government attempted
to curb the use of weapons, there was
always a tacit recognition of their need
for personal protection.
This was especially the case when
traveling outside of population centers,
where brigands and bandits were common.
Here, concealed carry seems to have been
common. Apuleius makes that point
emphatically multiple times in his novel
as a main character travels through
Greece. Quote, "I'm going to hurry back
early so that you don't have to fret
your pretty little head over me. And
it's not as if I'm going alone. I'll
have my trusty sword at my side, hanging
from my belt. This one piece of
equipment is as good as an armed escort,
so I'll be fine."
And then later, quote, "We naturally
thought, though well, I particularly
thought, that they were robbers of the
most depraved sort. Instantly I seized
my sword and freed it from the folds of
my clothing in which it hid, waiting for
this present need."
As the novel progresses, the main
character is waylaid in the countryside
by a bad-tempered Roman soldier. That
soldier is heavily armed and clad in
traditional raiment, though it's unclear
if that's standard practice or method to
emphasize his brutal character.
Nevertheless, we see that banditry was a
perpetual problem in the Roman world.
Cities might be weapons-free, but those
rules stopped at the city limits.
Indeed, most rural cities were even
obligated to take on anti-bandit
operations themselves, and were rewarded
by imperial governments for doing so.
These two texts from inscriptions in
Bubon and Palmyra are great examples of
cases where citizens took up arms in
defense of their city to great acclaim.
Feel free to pause the video now to have
a read.
There's much more to discuss when it
comes to these sorts of topics of law
enforcement in the ancient world, and
we've actually got an entire series on
Roman law and order if you want to learn
more.
But for now, this is where we'll end our
particular episode on weapons control.
If you enjoy our work, consider
supporting us on Patreon to participate
in polls, catch script previews, and get
HD downloads of all our art.
We owe a huge debt to our current
patrons for funding the channel, and to
our researchers, writers, and artists
for making this episode possible. We
certainly couldn't have done it without
this team and this community. So, be
sure to like and subscribe for more
content, and check out these other
related videos.
We'll see you in the next one.